
SPEAKER 1 0:00:00
eapan, koutou koutou kiakia. So we'll start with the apologies and I guess we have Hazel everyone else seems to be here I think so could I have a mover please? Andrew just just before you do just before you do I have to leave the meeting at 130 to attend a future proof meeting so sorry about that so my apologies from them. Good as gold thanks Jim. So we should we include that in the in the motion as well. If someone would like to move please. Happy to move Mike. Thanks Lou, thanks Susan. All in favour? Aye. Contrary no. It's carried. Disclosure of members interests do we have any today? No I'll move on to item four late items. Any late items? No late items so confirmation of order of meeting. No changes Ken? No I don't see any need for change we do have a number of guests joining us at the meeting today 
SPEAKER 2 0:01:09
but they're well aware of the time so yes I'm hoping they'll be here at the required time. 
SPEAKER 1 0:01:15
Happy to move Andrew. Graham. Thanks Graham. A seconder? I second Susan. Thanks Susan I think that was. Cheers. All in favour please say aye. Aye. Contrary no carried. Okay item six which is confirmation of the minutes from 18 February. Have we all I'll take those as being read anything raised from those minutes? Andrew Graham speaking my diary showing me that I was at that meeting but my name's not recorded there. Right I was going to bring that up too so yeah I think there's some mistakes. Thanks Bruce. Okay so I'm sure we can have that remedied Sam. Yes we'll make the changes. Thank you. Okay so with that change could I have a mover for the minutes to be received as a true and correct recall please. Thank you Marcus. Seconder? I'll second it. Thanks Bruce. All in favour please say aye. Aye. Contrary no carried. Thank you. Item seven Jason. Has Jason joined us? He has. I see Sam nodding. Hi Jason how are you doing? Good thank you. Great and the floor is yours. Okay Sam I don't think we had issues with trying to get the presentation is that right? 
SPEAKER 2 0:02:44
Oh no Sam is sharing. Brilliant. 
SPEAKER 1 0:02:47
Perfect. Thanks Sam. Good morning or good afternoon sorry everyone. Thanks for allowing me time just to give you a quick update on where we are as a sector for tourism and particularly for Waipa district. So a report has obviously been provided to you and prepared which is 
SPEAKER 2 0:03:04
a report that's been put out by the Ministry of Tourism and Tourism and Tourism and Tourism and particularly for Waipa district. So a report has obviously been provided to you and prepared which was our last six months performance at the end of 31st December 2019. As you would have seen Waipa district council was going through significant growth. Probably one of the fastest growing regions for us with regards to tourism impact. You were experiencing double digit growth pretty much through visitor expenditure and also commercial accommodation. But we are here today to discuss just obviously a bit of a change in the dynamic given COVID and the impact for tourism 
SPEAKER 1 0:03:44
particularly as a sector. Go to the next slide Sam. 
SPEAKER 2 0:03:55
Perfect. So just first a couple of slides obviously just covering off some data. We're now receiving international and national data on a weekly basis from the government and also from the airlines. So no surprise obviously since COVID lockdown and international travel restrictions were put in place. International visitor arrivals into New Zealand has been dropping at a very sharp rate. We still do have airline connectivity which I will go through because we are still maintaining what we call a baseline service for connections across the world mainly for repatriation flights but also for cargo and service across the country as well. 
SPEAKER 1 0:04:34
Next slide Sam. So weekly card transactions again no surprise obviously overall our visitor 
SPEAKER 2 0:04:44
expenditure is down significantly. But when you do look on to the list top five obviously food, liquor and pharmacies, we are still seeing some cumulative and some obviously weekly growth in expenditure compared to all our other visitor type expenditure and transactions as well. Thanks Sam. 
SPEAKER 1 0:05:04
Next slide. So the impact for us as a sector again look I mean every all of this has been 
SPEAKER 2 0:05:13
reported but just to cover off in summary we were already impacted through the loss of China group travel which started in the second to last week of January. So with that all of our international facing products, our hotels, our motels, our airbnbs were immediately impacted by that because many of China group travel actually did stay in the Waikato. They were our fourth largest international visitor market behind Australia, North America and UK and Europe. It did shut us down pretty much once international travel restrictions hit us and the visitor economy covers more than just the tourism operators. Again we've mentioned accommodation it also impacts retail, hospitality, transport providers, our operators of course but also event organisers in major venues and of course Mystery Creek, Avanti Drome and Lake 
SPEAKER 1 0:06:02
Harapero are key event platforms for Waipa District. We have had significant job losses 
SPEAKER 2 0:06:09
and business closures across tourism. I have down underneath that last bullet point look the immediate business impact that we have been coaching our businesses through and helping them get through. Some have gone into what we call temporary or seasonal closure so again we have a lot of seasonality in tourism. Many who would close for winter have closed but those that potentially have never closed before we've suggested they go into hibernation and so that's what we're calling temporary seasonal closures. We've had a number of businesses you know Hobbiton was obviously one of the most public ones reported in the media but again all our motels, hotels, retail, hospitality have pretty much reduced service and staff. There's only essential services operating as we know but again with alert level three we do see some opening up potentially in the hospitality sector for Waipa anyway and then the last obviously implication for us is we have had a number of businesses who are permanently closing. Not only are these a loss definitely to the tourism industry to try and bring people back when we don't have products but also particularly for those vulnerable communities where some of 
SPEAKER 1 0:07:15
these operators have been going for many years. Thanks Sam. Sorry can I ask a question about that? Sure. Have you got examples of what businesses are struggling and like what who isn't closing like who is closing and how it is impacting 
SPEAKER 2 0:07:32
around the wider district? Yeah so particularly for Waipa it has mainly been your hospitality potentially some of your retail and also accommodation. So we've had many nearly all of your accommodation has pretty much gone into hibernation or closure. They're calling it temporary closure but there's some of them have been able to access the wage subsidy which is great but again what we're going to see is the impacts are longer than the 12-week wage subsidy right now so it's post 12 weeks what we're quite concerned about. We have been lobbying nationally the government and I think that's all sectors not just tourism around potentially extending the wage subsidy for 20 weeks because it will take a lot to restart the tourism sector again. People's propensity to travel is quite low. We will travel locally and potentially we will travel intra-regionally so staying within the region but to try and stand up the domestic travel market is going to be a long haul that we're looking at a 6 to 12 months recovery plan for that. Great so lastly look I mean no surprise here this was just something we do for industries people know where we all fit so from the tourism perspective when we respond obviously we're providing the industry support right now at a national level, regional level and also at a local level but then we have Te Waka, our chambers of commerce, our business associations and all local government have been great and actually supporting us with what we call the business and community support side for tourism businesses and then lastly we're obviously partnered with the civil defense network around providing welfare support not just for tourism operators again it's also been utilizing tourism operators many of our caterers have now been repurposed into providing food services pretty much or supporting the food banks and actually cooking meals. We also have a number of our transport operators and tourism being basically now to provide transport options and actually getting people around such as essential workers and many of the staff potentially we've been redeploying into the civil defense network through providing security and welfare and call center as well so not only are we also working 
SPEAKER 1 0:09:41
with civil defense we're also putting staff into there as well. Thanks Sam. Even though we're obviously dealing with COVID this is just for you to be aware there are 
SPEAKER 2 0:09:59
obviously continuing issues that that were going on with COVID and with the tourism industry. First up was domestic airline connectivity so look Air New Zealand has been pretty open that they will not be restarting until alert level one so we meet with Air New Zealand weekly just to see how we will try and stand the industry back up again. They're going to focus very much what we call an incremental restart so that's doing a width and breadth strategy across the country so potentially maybe only two or three flights into Hamilton per day but again it's to try and get that reach across the whole network first before they can actually stand up and have a full schedule like we have seen out of Hamilton airport particularly over the last three to four years. Airline connectivity internationally is still continuing so those are just some a summary of some of the ones that are still flying so look Air New Zealand are still connecting into North America and Hong Kong into Australia. Fiji Airlines are still flying into Fiji on a daily service and Qatar has probably used the most to try and repatriate northern hemisphere travelers back to their homes through Qatar and then also Korean Airlines are still operating a daily service as well. For future again Air New Zealand is saying they will be focusing very much on the domestic market first. They will traditionally be a domestic airline for the first six to twelve months and domestic also includes Australia in the Pacific. American Airlines so far have been the only one we've met with who plan to return to New Zealand from October 2020 so they have put a stake in the ground to say when they will start flying into New Zealand again. Now the reason why I just raised international airline connectivity is because it will take this country at least two to five years before we ever go back to the type of connectivity we've had as a country previously before lockdown so again it's going to be a very long burn for us as a country to regain the international visitor arrivals we've seen in the past. Air traffic control services up for review the reason why I just put that in there is just to let everyone know there was no Waikato airports or airfields but particularly Hamilton airport isn't impacted but for us in the central North Island Rotorua is one that is going to be impacted around potentially the closure of air traffic control tower services. That will mean potentially that we will be re-diverting the domestic network through Tauranga and Hamilton so unfortunately for Rotorua's loss it could be our gain. And then lastly we've still got the investigation underway around Whakaari White Island so the WorkSafe investigation should be coming to a close shortly. There will be impacts on the tourism and suppliers around adventure tourism for this country and also we will be up weighting Qualmark which is our accreditation 
SPEAKER 1 0:12:38
program particularly around health and safety for the country. Thanks Sam. 
SPEAKER 2 0:12:48
Just some events updates obviously we're now field days is going online so from the 30th of June for two weeks field days will be providing a virtual exhibition space very similar to other international events who offer this type of experience. Again it is a trial but we do hope to bring field days back in 2021. Obviously not only is the largest major event for Waipa but it's definitely for the Waikato with regards to economic impact. We worked due to host the New Zealand tourism awards in November that has been postponed until next year so we will reset the date for that. Explore and trends these are what we call our two main international trade shows they've obviously been delayed. Trends 2021 which is the main time when we actually sell the Waikato to the world we will not be having until maybe June next year so it's just awaiting on a date for that. Two major convention centres were due to open this year Te Pae and Christchurch which potentially is the one that will be taking a lot of business away for us for business events that has now been delayed for another year and of course the New Zealand international convention centre we will not know the reopening date of that until they work through the final insurance claims. So again by having these two convention centres not operating means that places like Claude Lins and the Mystery Creek event centre are going to be filling the gap for national and international conferences for the short term which is actually a good opportunity for us again as a 
SPEAKER 1 0:14:15
region post-COVID. But we also do still have events planned so the major events obviously 
SPEAKER 2 0:14:21
the National Waka Ama is at this stage still planned to take effect in Lake Karapiro and we also have our first major event for the region the ICC Women's Cricket World Cup scheduled for the 8th of February. Again this one will particularly be decided by around October-November whether we international travel restrictions have lifted to enable some of the players to come otherwise they will have to go into if it does continue into isolation until the Cricket World 
SPEAKER 1 0:14:51
Cup can be held. So what we have seen particularly for other parts of the sector is that events 
SPEAKER 2 0:14:59
have been more postponed for Waipa and for the wider Waikato region rather than completely cancelled and not returning. So there is some positivity for us as we do see this is the lead 
SPEAKER 1 0:15:10
sector to inter-recovery economically and socially for the district. Next slide Sam. Thanks. The response we have a what we call a three-tiered response plan. Obviously this is no 
SPEAKER 2 0:15:29
similar to everyone else right now. We have a mitigate process which we're currently in now. We then have a restart phase and then we have a reimagined phase. So initially in the response phase no different to everyone else lots of briefings, lots of support. We're obviously having face-to-face briefings across all the sector long before the shutdown and now we've moved to the virtual space. We're still doing advocacy at a national level to try and make sure we can access more business support for the region. Some of the gap right now out of government support and out of the support that Te Waka can provide is it doesn't cover any employees for 100 employees plus. So that's quite the pointy end of town we call it for most of our region for our big employers. Again wage subsidy okay but outside of that there's actually no large industry support. So we've been pushing that through government to try and unlock some of that if this lockdown continues. We've been doing one-on-one operator check-ins. We have 240 listed operators with us. So again these are daily to weekly check-ins by all our teams to make sure everyone's been able to access business advice and some of the wage support. We've been doing webinars and we've now moved in the last two weeks into workforce redeployment. So again we've been taking some organizations or employers that have maybe at least five to ten staff members displaced through to Hobbiton who had one of the largest at around 270 and actually redeploying them and offering them redeployment options into the kiwifruit industry. We placed 110 staff into kiwifruit with transport from Hobbiton as well as the avocado industry which will be the next seasonal workforce will be will be standing up until the end of the year. We'll put staff into supermarkets, civil defense, security and also they've been providing some services from home. But again what we are going to see over the next two weeks and we're starting to measure that is the full impacts of people that we cannot redeploy that potentially will be out of work. So there is currently a survey underway and we'll be updating all councils and the government around the overall impact for tourism in Waikato. 
SPEAKER 1 0:17:32
Thanks Sam. Under the restart phase so again we want to congratulate local government because 
SPEAKER 2 0:17:38
obviously getting some of those shovel ready projects through with the Crown infrastructure partners for their consideration is a great win for the region but potentially for the sector. Pretty much every district has put up around one to two tourism projects as part of shovel ready so again we do need to focus on the future and how we'll restart the region. Research, we were already in market and about to finish up our domestic perceptions and major research. This is now becoming quite timely for us and will help us inform around how we will try and bring back the domestic travelers into the region based on some of the research we've undertaken. We're also working on a major and business events restart campaign so that planning has been underway for a couple of weeks so that when we're ready to go we can push go on that. We do see events and business events and corporate travel as being the kickstarter we need for economic and social recovery across the region. New developments again you've all got new developments going on potentially in your regions. Hidden Lake obviously one of your newest hotels in Cambridge only opened on Christmas Eve so Glenda and the team we've been keeping in touch with quite a lot because they haven't been in operation very long. Their impacts are quite severe so again making sure that we still have some future developments that will continue across the region to take us through the next stage. Data and insights I've touched on they've now gone to weekly so again we're sharing that information and Te Waka are now we're contributing to the Te Waka economic outlook as well which is great and then lastly the Mighty Local campaign was launched two weeks ago and it's definitely around the restart phase. Thanks Sam. So Mighty Local again was a partnership with ourselves Te Waka all the chambers of commerce and obviously Cambridge chamber of commerce plus the Waikato chamber of commerce all our councils the business associations that also exist in some communities and all our regional eye sites. We're in phase one so for the last two weeks we've been promoting businesses with contactless delivery, promoting you know people that are still doing entertainment online or virtually from within Waikato, recipes from our beloved chefs, well-being and fitness and this week we launched business stories so again we're starting to use this platform to promote some of the businesses and how they're pivoting into obviously response or looking at different opportunities for their business. So the idea is to try and give people hope during phase one. During phase two which is obviously from alert level three we will increase our takeaway and F&B listings and also essential services are starting to grow as well. In phase two we will move more to a local phase at the moment it's a regional platform but the idea is potentially people will be able to to be able to group the types of information and services available at a 
SPEAKER 1 0:20:27
local community level and at a district level as well. And then phase three which is when hopefully 
SPEAKER 2 0:20:33
all travel restrictions are lifted we will then activate the basically the buy local, eat local, event local, shop, visit and explore within the region and obviously that's in partnership with many communities and business associations that already have local programs such as Cambridge with their totally locally Cambridge campaign. So we're working with Kelly and the team around how we would try and push their program rather than this one once we get to phase three. And when it comes to how we will actually respond long term so at the moment we're in phase one so we're calling it the hyper local phase so one to three months we'll be pushing basically localism everything to do with obviously how you purchase and interact with your local community. At phase two which then we'll move into a three to six month bracket we're estimating we can then start to do intra-regional travel so we'll be targeting the drive market within the Waikato region. We'll be hopefully starting to stand up community events again that can happen at a local level and regional business meetings might be able to begin again with social distancing. At level three which is what we're planning our scenarios for six to twelve months we can then stand up the domestic market that is when potentially we will mainly focus on drive. So as you've heard me say before 2.5 potentially 3 million people live within three hours radius of the Waikato region including the region itself. So we'll definitely be focusing on the drive market national events will be returning as well as national meetings and then eventually corporate travel which again business are quite a good lead for us with regards to stand up the sector again. And then lastly we're planning on one to two years before we actually start to see any sort of international impact again. Short haul markets into Australia and the Pacific will open first and then we will eventually move back into major events international conferences and starting to bring back the corporate and leisure travel market into Waikato. So that's the time frame we are currently doing our scenario planning for but as we all know it may change every week based 
SPEAKER 1 0:22:43
on the alert levels we have. And then lastly reimagine. So you would have seen that last week 
SPEAKER 2 0:22:57
or actually two weeks ago as well the government announced that there was a call to reshape and reimagine the tourism industry. So we have been pushing for the last two to three months with Tourism New Zealand and the Minister for Tourism around what we're calling a reimagining of tourism. Now is our chance that this is more than a shock it's actually a bit of a circuit breaker for the sector and for all business sectors for us all to look and see how could we do our businesses differently. We all knew that tourism was growing at quite an exponential rate and there were some areas that were really feeling the pressure such as Queenstown and central Otago and Cathedral Cove some of our sites Mount Tongariro. So for us now it's great to see the government are taking this seriously. So we're now working with Tourism New Zealand to lead a new plan domestically and internationally but also look at all these types of questions you know where our previous visit arrivals and expenditure growth right for the region. What will success look like for us for the future for a visitor market. How do we move our sector from boom and bust again no different to the food and fibre sector or any other business cycle. And lastly how do we move to more sustainable community-led tourism and for us in the Waikato what we call creating net benefit rather than just benefiting those that potentially were making money out of tourism. We want to see communities thrive and that they have the decision around what sort of tourism they want. So again we will be moving our 2016 tourism opportunities plan which many of you were involved in. We will now be developing a destination management plan and that will be happening nationally as well to try and what we call transform tourism for the better. So there is no such word as recovery now. We will not be receiving the same sorts of level of tourism as we did previously. 